# Homework

# Homework 1

### General questions

- Question 1
    1. Domestic price: $P_q$
    2. Quantity produced domestically: $Q_2$
    3. Quantity consumed domestically: $Q_3$
    4. Quantity of imports: $Q_2-Q_3$
    5. Quota revenue: $(Q_3-Q_2)P_q$
- Question 2
    1. Domestic consumers suffer from the higher price ($P_w → P_q$). Consumer surplus falls.
    2. Domestic producers enjoy the higher price 
    3. Domestic employment increases due to higher production
    4. Foreign producers gain/lose depending on loss of export revenue vs quota revenue
    5. No gains or losses if quota licenses are sold. Loses if otherwise
    6. Low efficiency in production
    7. Global resources are not efficiently allocated
- Question 3
    1. The main difference is where the revenue incurred by the restrictions end up. In the case of tariffs, the difference in price goes to the domestic government in the form of tax revenue whereas quota revenue goes to foreign producers.
    2. Foreign producers tend to prefer quota revenue as they are able to obtain the licences for free while tariffs require them to pay taxes
- Question 4
    
    Overall, a quota benefits domestic producers at the expense of nearly every other stakeholder group. This goes to show how influential the rich elites of a nation is on their policies. He who has the gold has the power. 
    
    Between the government, domestic importers, and foreign exporters, where the benefits fall depends on the choices of the government. 
    
    ```jsx
    case (reciver_of_free_licence){
    	switch ("domestic_importers"){benefits → "domestic importers"}
    	switch ("foreign_exporters"){benefits → "foriegn exporters"}
    	default {benefits → "government"}
    }
    ```
    
    The economies of both the importer and exporter suffers due to inefficient allocation of resources.
    
    Some workers may benefit from more jobs available.
    

### US Sugar Quotas

- Question 1
    
    Assuming the US does not have a comparative advantage in the sugar market, increasing the quota would lead to an increase in imports and thus lower prices.
    
- Question 2
    
    Copy section 1
    
- Question 3
    
    To protect domestic producers from competition and increase domestic employment
    

# Page 2

- Question 1
    1. Absolute advantage is a form of comparative advantage where a country is able to produce more of a good than another. In comparison, comparative advantage occurs when one country has a lower opportunity cost when producing a product relative to another country
        1. A country has a comparative advantage in production of a certain product when it can produce that product at a lower opportunity cost than another country
    2. Absolute vs Comparative advantages
        1. Because the world’s productive resources are not distributed evenly between nations, it does not make sense that every nation tries to produce all the goods they need. Instead, nations specialise in goods for which they have appropriate natural/human/capital resources. 
        2. If a country has an absolute advantage over both goods, they do not require trade with the other nation
    3. The theory of comparative advantage is more powerful as it covers more cases of situations than absolute advantage and allows both nations to benefit beyond their own P.P.C.

# Homework 2

## 1

1. New price paid: $350
2. Domestic producer’s revenue per unit: $350
3. Sales before: 350 k
4. Sales after: 270 k

## 2

1. Consumer expenditure: $10.5 m
2. Change in domestic producer revenue: $300(100,000)-350(200,000)=$  $40,000
3. Change in government budget $50×(100,000) = 5,000,000$
4. Change in foreign producer’s quantity of exports: 
5. ?

## 1 - 2

1. Domestic production before quota: 200,000 units
2. Domestic production after quota:    200,000 units
3. Imports after quota:                         200,000 units

## 2 - 2

1. Change in consumer expenditure: $400,000×120 = 48000000$$
2. Change in producer revenue: $48000000-100(200,000)=28000000$$
3. Quota revenue: $0$
4. Change in importer quantity: $-500,000+200,000=-300,000$
5. Change in importer revenue: $100(500,000)-120(200,000)=-26,000,000$

## 3 - 2

1. No effect on government budget
2. Foreign producers lose 26,000,000

## 1 - 3

1.