# WTO

# Introduction

## Details

### Members

> 164 members since 29 July 2016
> 

### Headquarters

> Centre William Rappard, Geneva, Switzerland
> 

### Formation

> 1 January 1995
> 

### Precursor

> General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
 (GATT)
> 

# History

## 1930 — Great Depression

During the great depression, many nations enacted trade protectionism in an attempt to weather the storm caused by the US. However, this only worsened the conditions as investment stalled and prices rose.

> *...had more countries been willing to abandon the gold standard and 
use monetary policy to counter the slump, fewer would have been driven 
to impose trade restrictions.*
> 

Many countries still upheld the `Gold standard` at the time which limited the printing of money. Expansionary fiscal and monetary policies could not be enacted, leading to the continued effect of the depression.

## 1947 — End of WWII

### Organisations of the time

After the WWII: GATT, IMF, World Bank

- Multilateral institutions dedicated to international economic cooperation

### Failed organisations: ITO

> A comparable international institution for trade, named the International Trade Organisation never started as the U.S. and other signatories did not ratify the establishment treaty,
> 

## 1995 — Formal formation of WTO

> The World Trade Organisation (WTO) was established on January 1, 1995, under an agreement reached during the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations. The Uruguay Round was the last of a series of periodic trade negotiations held under the auspices of the WTO’s predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
> 

# Functions

### Quotes

> The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is the only global international organisation dealing with the rules of trade between nations. At its heart are the WTO agreements, negotiated and signed by the bulk of the world’s trading nations and ratified in their parliaments. The goal is to help producers of goods and services, exporters, and importers conduct their business.
> 

> There are a number of ways of looking at the WTO. It’s an organisation for liberalising trade. It’s a forum for governments to negotiate trade agreements. It’s a place for them to settle trade disputes. It operates a system of trade rules.
> 

### Notes

- Trade negotiations
    - Facilitates discussion
    - Sets rules
    - Prevents exploitation
    - **Details**
        
        The WTO agreements cover goods, services and intellectual property. They spell out the principles of liberalisation, and the permitted exceptions. They include individual countries’ commitments to lower customs tariffs and other trade barriers, and to open and keep open services markets. They set procedures for settling disputes. These agreements are not static; they are renegotiated from time to time and new agreements can be added to the package. Many are now being negotiated under the Doha Development Agenda, launched by WTO trade ministers in Doha, Qatar, in November 2001.
        
- Implementation and monitoring
    - Enforcing agreements
    - Coordinated retaliation
    - Ensures agreements are followed through with
    - Ensure proper implementation based on their rules
    - **Details**
        
        WTO agreements require governments to make their trade policies transparent by notifying the WTO about laws in force and measures adopted. Various WTO councils and committees seek to ensure that these requirements are being followed and that WTO agreements are being properly implemented. All WTO members must undergo periodic scrutiny of their trade policies and practices, each review containing reports by the country concerned and the WTO Secretariat.
        
- Dispute settlement
    - Enforcement
    - Neutral judges (Theoretically)
    - **Details**
        
        The WTO’s procedure for resolving trade quarrels under the Dispute Settlement Understanding is vital for enforcing the rules and therefore for ensuring that trade flows smoothly. Countries bring disputes to the WTO if they think their rights under the agreements are being infringed. Judgements by specially appointed independent experts are based on interpretations of the agreements and individual countries’ commitments.
        
- Building trade capacity
    - Special provisioning for developing nations
    - Implement technical standards
    - **Details**
        
        WTO agreements contain special provision for developing countries, including longer time periods to implement agreements and commitments, measures to increase their trading opportunities, and support to help them build their trade capacity, to handle disputes and to implement technical standards. The WTO organises hundreds of technical cooperation missions to developing countries annually. It also holds numerous courses each year in Geneva for government officials. Aid for Trade aims to help developing countries develop the skills and infrastructure needed to expand their trade.
        
- Outreach
    - Communication with governments
    - Media manipulation
    - **Details**
        
        The WTO maintains regular dialogue with non-governmental organisations, parliamentarians, other international organisations, the media and the general public on various aspects of the WTO and the ongoing Doha negotiations, with the aim of enhancing cooperation and increasing awareness of WTO activities.
        

# Principles

- Non-discrimination
    
    A country should not discriminate between its trading partners, and it should not discriminate between its own and foreign products, services or nationals.
    
- Opening trade
    
    Lowering trade barriers is an obvious way to encourage trade; these barriers include customs duties (or tariffs) and measures such as import bans or quotas, that restrict quantities selectively.
    
- Predictability and transparency
    
    Foreign companies, investors and governments should be confident that trade barriers will not be raised arbitrarily. With stability and predictability, investment is encouraged, jobs are created and consumers can fully enjoy the benefits of competition – such as increased choice and lower prices.
    
- Fair competition
    
    Discouraging “unfair” practices, such as export subsidies and dumping products at below normal value to gain market share; the issues are complex, and the rules try to establish what is fair or unfair, and how governments can respond, in particular by charging additional import duties calculated to compensate for damage caused by unfair trade.
    
- Support for less developed countries
    
    Over three-quarters of WTO members are developing economies or in transition to market economies. The WTO agreements give them transition periods to adjust to WTO provisions and, in the case of the Trade Facilitation Agreement, provide for practical support for implementation of the Agreement.
    
- Protection of the environment
    
    The WTO agreements permit members to take measures to protect not only public, animal and plant health but also the environment. However, these measures must be applied in the same way to both national and foreign businesses: members must not use environmental protection measures as a means of introducing discriminatory trade barriers.
    
- Inclusion
    
    The WTO seeks to build a more inclusive trading system that will allow more women and small businesses to participate in trade and to reap the economic benefits of global trading.
    
- Partnerships
    
    The WTO maintains regular dialogue with civil society, labour unions, universities and the business community to enhance cooperation and build partnerships. The WTO’s Trade Dialogues initiative and the annual Public Forum provide a platform for civil society and business groups to discuss the latest developments in world trade and to propose ways of enhancing the multilateral trading system.
    
- Digital trade
    
    The WTO recognises the growing importance of e-commerce. Periodic reviews of the WTO’s work programme on e-commerce are conducted by the General Council based on reports from various WTO bodies. In addition, a group of like-minded members are conducting negotiations on e-commerce, with a view to developing global digital trade rules and addressing challenges posed by the digital divide.
    

# Objectives

### Improving people’s lives

> The fundamental goal of the WTO is to improve the welfare of people 
around the world. The WTO’s founding Marrakesh agreement recognizes that
 trade should be conducted with a view to raising standards of living, 
ensuring full employment, increasing real income and expanding global 
trade in goods and services while allowing for the optimal use of the 
world’s resources.
> 

### Negotiating trade rules

> The WTO was born out of five decades of negotiations aimed at 
progressively reducing obstacles to trade. Where countries have faced 
trade barriers and wanted them lowered, the negotiations have helped to 
open markets for trade. Conversely, in some circumstances, WTO rules 
support maintaining trade barriers – for example, to protect consumers 
or the environment.
> 

### Overseeing WTO agreements

> At its heart are the WTO agreements, negotiated and signed by the 
bulk of the world’s trading nations. Essentially contracts, these 
documents provide the rules for international commerce and bind 
governments to keep their trade policies within agreed limits. Their 
goal is to help producers of goods and services, exporters and importers
 conduct their business, with a view to raising standards of living, 
while allowing governments to meet social and environmental objectives.
> 

### Maintaining open trade

> The system’s overriding purpose is to help trade flow as freely as 
possible – provided there are no undesirable side effects – because this
 stimulates economic growth and employment and supports the integration 
of developing countries into the international trading system. Its rules
 have to be transparent and predictable, to ensure that individuals, 
companies and governments know what the trade rules are around the 
world, and to assure them that there will be no sudden changes of 
policy.
> 

### Settling disputes

> Trade relations often involve conflicting interests. Agreements, 
including those painstakingly negotiated in the WTO, often need 
interpreting. The most harmonious way to settle these differences is 
through a neutral procedure based on an agreed legal foundation. That is
 the purpose behind the dispute settlement process written into the WTO 
agreements.
> 
- Establishing and Enforcing Rules for International Trade
    
    > The international trading rules by the World Trade Organisation are established under three separate agreements – rules relating to the international trade in goods; the agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
    > 
    
    > The enforcement of rules by the WTO takes place by way of a multilateral system of disputes settlement in the instances of violation of trade rules by member countries. The members are obligated under ratified agreements to honor and abide by the procedures and judgments.
    > 
- Acting As A Global Apex Forum
    
    > World Trade organization is the global forum for monitoring and negotiating further trade liberalization. The premise of trade liberalization measures undertaken by WTO is based on the benefits of member countries to optimally utilize the position of comparative advantage due to a free and fair trade regime.
    > 
- Resolution Of Trade Disputes
    
    > To resolve economic conflicts arising from trade disputes
    > 
    
    > Trade disputes, before the WTO, usually arise out of deviation from agreements between member countries. The resolution of such trade disputes does not take place unilaterally but through a multilateral system involving set rules and procedures before the dispute settlement body.
    > 
- Increasing Transparency in The Decision-Making Process
    
    > The World Trade Organisation attempts to increase transparency in the decision-making process by way of more participation in the decision-making and consensus rule, in particular. The combined effect of such measures helps to develop institutional transparency.
    > 
- Collaboration Between International Economic Institutions
    
    > The global economic institutions include the World Trade Organisation, the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and the World Bank.
    > 
    
    > With the advent of globalization, close cooperation has become necessary between multilateral institutions. These institutions are functional in the sector of formulation and implementation of a global economic policy framework. In the absence of regular consultation and mutual cooperation, policy making may be disrupted.
    > 
- Safeguarding The Trading Interest of Developing Countries
    
    > Stringent regulations are implemented by the WTO to protect the trading interests of developing countries. It supports such member countries to leverage the capacity for carrying out the mandates of the organization, managing disputes, and implementing relevant technical standards.
    > 

# In Practice

## Advantages

- Reduction of trade barriers
- Central authority for standardisation
- Incentive to comply
- “Equal access” for all firms from member countries
- predictability and transparency of international trade
- increased competitiveness by eliminating unfair practices between trading partners aimed at stimulating trade, primarily export subsidies and dumping
- opportunity to defend trade interests at the WTO Dispute Settlement Body, since all Members will have international commitments towards Belarus for non-application of trade restrictions.

## Disadvantages

- Rules cannot be enforced on larger and more powerful nations
    
    > **WTO says U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods violated international trade rules**
    > 
    
    It was announced but without repercussion
    
- Heavily influenced by politics
    - The principle of non-discrimination is consistently violated
    
    > **U.S. blocks WTO judge reappointment as dispute settlement crisis looms**
    > 
    
    The US has the ability to cripple the WTO at will
    
- Many anti-WTO documents are promptly deleted from the internet…
- Unwillingness to punish minor misdeeds
    
    > **'Lax' copyright enforcement no WTO obstacle**
    > 
- Developing nations need trade protection
- Cannot give preference to local contractors
- Exploitation of developing nations

# Factors affecting WTO

## Politics

Sabotage by powerful nations

Unequal bargaining power of members

## National security

“national security exception” which allows WTO members to breach their WTO obligations for purposes of national security.

Used against Huawei, WeChat, TikTok, etc.

US attempted to use this exception for tariffs imposed upon resources such as aluminium and steel.

WTO decided that the use was invalid by the US but ultimately ignored by Trump.

Trump proceeded to sabotage the WTO

[The WTO's First Ruling on National Security: What Does It Mean for the United States?](https://www.csis.org/analysis/wtos-first-ruling-national-security-what-does-it-mean-united-states)

# Citations

[The U.S.'s Power-Based Bargaining and the WTO: Has Anything Really Been Gained?](https://www.aaea.org/about-aaea/media--public-relations/press-releases/the-uss-power-based-bargaining-and-the-wto--has-anything-really-been-gained)

[The Roots of Protectionism in the Great Depression](https://www.nber.org/digest/oct09/roots-protectionism-great-depression)

[WTO | What is the WTO?](https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/whatis_e.htm)

[The World Trade Organization: Background and Issues](https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/98-928.html)

[WTO says U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods violated international trade rules](https://www.cnbc.com/2020/09/15/wto-says-us-tariffs-on-chinese-goods-violated-international-trade-rules.html)

[U.S. blocks WTO judge reappointment as dispute settlement crisis looms](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trade-wto-idUSKCN1LC19O)

['Lax' copyright enforcement no WTO obstacle](http://www.tribune242.com/news/2014/jan/28/lax-copyright-enforcement-no-wto-obstacle/)