# Case study

## Trade between China and Australia

## Background

- China is Australia’s largest trading partner for the past three decades
- Due to Chinese demand, Australia avoided the 2008-2010 global financial crisis
- China & Australia are a match made in heaven in terms of their industries
- COVID caused political conflicts and thus Australia suffered its first recession

## Data

Top 3 import sources

- China
- US
- Japan

## Inquiry

Who are the winners and losers between China and Australia

### Data

Relies on China for 39.4% of goods and 17.6% of services

Up to 218% tariffs

**Australians Exports**

- Beef
    - Brazil, US, and India are all competitors to Australia. China has choices while Australia lacks customers
- Wine
    - Unnecessary good
- Coal
    - Customers are limited as the rest of the world moves away from coal towards more sustainable sources of energy. In contrast, China has many options such as Indonesia, Russia, and South Africa

> Thanks to the Australia-shaped gap in the Chinese market, other countries have seized the opportunity to create their own trade relations with Beijing. At the beginning of 2020, a ‘phase-one’ trade deal was signed between then American President Donald Trump and Chinese Vice Premier Liu He. According to data from the [U.S. Department of Agriculture](https://www.reuters.com/world/americas/brazil-beef-exports-us-rise-amid-china-australia-trade-spat-2021-07-01/)，the US sold 48,292 swt of beef to China from January to April 2021, up sharply from 3,255 swt in the same period of 2020.
> 
> 
> Brazil and Argentina also saw a significant rise in their exports to China. In the first four months of 2021, China imported more than 178 480 swt of beef from Argentina, up from almost 152 780 swt a year earlier, according to data from China’s General Administration of Customs department. Meanwhile, [Brazilian beef exports to China rose](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/mar/16/eating-up-the-rainforest-chinas-taste-for-beef-drives-exports-from-brazil) to 76% in 2020, supplying 43% of China’s meat imports that year.
> 
> In Europe, France out-stripped Australia’s wine exportation to China from the beginning of 2021, to become Beijing’s new number one bottled wine supplier in volume terms (27.1 million liters), with a growth of 16% compared with the same period last year. Second to France was Chile, who saw a 23% growth (15.83 million liters). Coming in third at 10.61 million liters was Spain, down by 4% over the same period. Italy’s export volume to China [slightly dropped](https://www.decanterchina.com/en/news/top-10-sources-of-imported-wines-in-china-the-half-year-report) by 1% to 7.38 million liters. 
> 
> — Diplomat Courier
> 

Australia has thus far been the overall loser in this trade war due to its lack of established partners and demand for its products. In contrast, China has already found more suppliers for its needs with lower costs.

Coal is an especially problematic export as the rest of the world shifts towards renewable sources of energy.

The quality and safety of products from developing nations such as Brazil and Argentina could be an area of concern for China.

China can also indirectly suffer due to the global implications of a continent in recession. It is nearly impossible for me to calculate the knock on effects of a receding Australian economy as a student. 

However, the setbacks are minor and do not pose a significant threat to China.